Healthy Start Provider Requirements


Florida's Healthy Start Prenatal Risk Screening

Molina Healthcare providers must offer Florida's Healthy Start prenatal risk screening to each
pregnant member as part of her first prenatal visit. When conducting the Prenatal Risk-
Screening, Molina providers must:

      Use the Department of Health-approved Healthy Start (Prenatal) Risk Screening
       Instrument.

      Keep a copy of the completed screening instrument in the member's medical record and
       provide a copy to the member.

      Submit the Healthy Start (Prenatal) Risk Screening Instrument to the CHD in the county
       where the prenatal screen was completed within ten (10) business days of completion of
       the screening.

Florida's Healthy Start Infant (Postnatal) Risk Screening Instrument

Florida hospitals electronically file the Healthy Start (Postnatal) Risk Screening Instrument
Certificate of Live Birth with the CHD in the county of birth within five (5) business days of the
birth.

For birthing facilities not participating in the Department of Health electronic birth registration
system, required birth information must be filed with the CHD within five (5) business days of the
birth. The provider must keep a copy of the completed Healthy Start (Postnatal) Risk Screening
Instrument in the member's medical record and mail a copy to the member.

Ineligible Members

Pregnant members or infants who do not score high enough to be eligible for Healthy Start case
management may be referred for services, regardless of their score on the Healthy Start risk
screen, in the following ways:

      If the referral is to be made at the same time the Healthy Start risk screen is
       administered, the provider may indicate on the risk screening form that the member or
       infant is invited to participate based on factors other than score; or

      If the determination is made subsequent to risk screening, the provider may refer the
       member or infant directly to the Healthy Start care coordinator based on assessment of
       actual or potential factors associated with high risk, such as Human Immunodeficiency
       Virus (HIV), Hepatitis B, substance abuse or domestic violence.

All infants, children under the age of five (5), and pregnant, breast-feeding and postpartum
women will be referred to the local WIC office. Molina Healthcare providers must provide:
      A completed Florida WIC program medical referral form with the current height or length
       and weight (taken within sixty (60) days of the WIC appointment);

      Hemoglobin or hematocrit; and

      Any identified medical/nutritional problems.

Providers must coordinate with the local WIC office to provide the above referral data from the
most recent CHCUP. For every WIC referral form completed, the provider must give a copy of
the form to the member and keep a copy in the member's medical record.

HIV Testing

Molina Healthcare providers must offer all women of childbearing age HIV counseling and HIV
testing at the initial prenatal care visit and again at twenty-eight (28) and thirty-two (32) weeks. If
the member declines an HIV test, providers must obtain a signed objection.

Providers must offer counseling to all pregnant members who are HIV positive and the latest
antiretroviral regimen recommended by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services.

Hepatitis B Testing

All pregnant members receiving prenatal care must be screened for the Hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg) during the first prenatal visit. A second HBsAg test must be conducted
between twenty-eight (28) and thirty-two (32) weeks of pregnancy for all members who tested
negative at the first prenatal visit, and are considered high risk for Hepatitis B infection.

Any HBsAg-positive women shall be reported to the local CHD and to Healthy Start, regardless
of their Healthy Start screening score.

Infants born to HBsAg-positive members shall receive Hepatitis B Immune Globulin (HBIG) and
the Hepatitis B vaccine once they are physiologically stable preferably within 12 hours of birth,
and shall complete the Hepatitis B vaccine series according to the vaccine schedule established
by the Recommended Childhood Immunization Schedule for the United States. Infants born to
HBsAg-positive members must be tested for HBsAg and Hepatitis B surface antibodies (anti-
HBs) six (6) months after the completion of the vaccine series for success or failure of the
therapy. Any child age 24 months or less (<24) who tests positive for HBsAg must be reported
to the local CHD within twenty-four (24) hours of the positive test results.

Infants born to members who are HBsAg-positive shall be reported to the local CHD and
Healthy Start regardless of their Healthy Start screening score..


Molina Healthcare providers must report all prenatal or postpartum members who test HBsAg-
positive to the Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Coordinator at the local CHD utilizing the
Practitioner Disease Report Form (DH- 2136).

Reporting must include the following information:
      Name
      Date of birth
      Race/Ethnicity
      Address
      Infants
      Contacts
      Laboratory test(s) performed and date the sample was collected
      The due date or estimated date of confinement,
      Whether the member received prenatal care, and
      Immunization dates for infants and contacts

Prenatal Care

Molina Healthcare providers must include the following in all prenatal care:

      A pregnancy test and a nursing assessment with referrals to a physician, PA or ARNP
       for comprehensive evaluation;

      Referral to care coordination/case management according to the needs of the member;

      Any necessary referrals and follow-up;

      Schedule return prenatal visits at least every four (4) weeks until week thirty-two (32),
       every two (2) weeks until week thirty-six (36), and every week thereafter until delivery,
       unless the member’s condition requires more frequent visits;

      Contact those members who fail to keep their prenatal appointments as soon as
       possible, and arrange for their continued prenatal care;

      Assist members in making delivery arrangements, if necessary;

      Refer pregnant members to appropriate maternity and family services, including notifying
       medical service payers of member status for further eligibility determination for the
       member and unborn infant; and

      Screening of all pregnant members for tobacco use and make certain that the providers
       make available to pregnant members smoking cessation counseling and appropriate
       treatment as needed.

Nutritional Assessment/Counseling

Providers must provide nutritional assessment and counseling to all pregnant members and
ensure the following:

      The provision of safe and adequate nutrition for infants by promoting breast-feeding and
       the use of breast milk substitutes;

      Offer a mid-level nutrition assessment;
      Provide individualized diet counseling and a nutrition care plan by a public health
       nutritionist, a nurse or physician; and

      Documentation of the nutrition care plan in the medical record by the person providing
       counseling.

Obstetrical Delivery

Molina Healthcare uses generally accepted and approved protocols for both low-risk and high-
risk deliveries, including Healthy Start and prenatal screening. For high risk pregnancies, OB
care during labor and delivery must include preparation for symptomatic evaluation and member
progression through the final stages of labor and postpartum care.

Preterm delivery risk assessments must be documented in the member’s medical record by
week twenty-eight (28).

Newborn Care

Molina Healthcare providers must supply the highest level of care for newborns beginning
immediately after birth.

Such level of care must include, but not be limited to:

      Instilling of prophylactic eye medications into each eye of the newborn;

      When the mother is Rh negative, securing a cord blood sample for type Rh
       determination and direct Coombs test;

      Weighing and measuring of the newborn;

      Inspecting the newborn for abnormalities and/or complications;

      Administering one half (.5) milligram of vitamin K;

      APGAR scoring

      Any other necessary and immediate need for referral in consultation from a specialty
       physician, such as the Healthy Start (postnatal) infant screen; and

      Laboratory screenings to test for metabolic, hereditary and congenital disorders known
       to result in significant impairment of health or intellect, in accordance with s. 383.14, F.S.

           o   These required laboratory tests shall be processed through the State Public
               Health Laboratory. Molina will reimburse for these screenings at the established
               Medicaid rate or specified contracted rate.
Postpartum Care

For postpartum members, Molina Healthcare providers must:

      Provide a postpartum examination for the member within six (6) weeks after delivery;

      Ensure that its providers supply voluntary family planning, including a discussion of all
       methods of contraception, as appropriate; and

      Ensure that continuing care of the newborn is provided through the CHCUP program
       component and documented in the child’s medical record.
